1. With reference to investments, consider  the following : I. Bonds Il. Hedge Funds Ill. Stocks IV. Venture Capital  How many of the above are treated as Alternative Investment Funds?  (a) Only one (b) Only two (c) Only three (d) All the four 
2. Which of the following are the sources of income for the Reserve Bank of India?  I. Buying and selling Government bonds  II. Buying and selling foreign currency  III. Pension fund management  IV. Lending to private companies  V. Printing and distributing currency notes  Select the correct answer using the code given below.  (a) 1 and II only (b) Il, I and IV (c) 1, Ill, IV and V (a) 1, Il and V 
3. With reference to the Government of India, consider the following information :  Organization| Some of its functions  Directorate of |Enforcement Enforcement |of the  It works under  Security Division-I, Ministry of Home Affairs  II. |Directorate of|Enforces the Revenue Provisions of Intelligence |the Customs  Act, 1962 Carrying out  Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance  Department  III.|Directorate  General of big data of Revenue, Systems analytics to {Ministry of and Data assist tax Finance Management |officers for  better policy and nabbing tax evaders In how many of the above rows is the information correctly matched?  (a) Only one (b) Only two  (c) All the three (d) None  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 
4. Consider the following statements :  I. The Reserve Bank of India mandates all the listed companies in India to submit a Business Responsibility and Sustainability Report (BRSR).  II. In India, a company submitting a BRSR makes disclosures in the report that are largely non-financial in nature.  Which of the statements given above  is/are correct?  (a) I only (b) II only (c) Both I and II (d) Neither I nor II 
5. Consider the following statements :  Statement I :  In India, income from allied agricultural activities like poultry farming and wool rearing in rural areas is exempted from any tax.  Statement II :  In India, rural agricultural land is not considered a capital asset under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.  Which one of the following is correct in  respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement II explains Statement I  (b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I  (c) Statement I is correct but Statement II is not correct  (da) Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct 
6. Consider the following statements :  I. India has joined the Minerals Security Partnership as a member.  Il. India is a resource-rich country in all the 30 critical minerals that it has identified.  Ill. The Parliament in 2023 has amended the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 empowering the Central Government to exclusively auction mining lease and composite license for certain critical minerals.  Which of the statements given above are  correct?  (a) land II only (b) II and III only (c) I and III only (d) I, II and III  [ P.T.O. 
7. Consider the following statements :  Statement I :  As regards returns from an investment in a company, generally, bondholders are considered to be relatively at lower risk than stockholders.  Statement II :  Bondholders are lenders to a company whereas stockholders are its owners.  Statement III :  For repayment purpose, bond- holders are prioritized over stockholders by a company.  Which one of the following is correct in  respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement I explains Statement II  (c) Only one of the Statements II and III is correct and that explains Statement I  (d) Neither Statement II nor Statement III is correct 
8. Consider the following statements : I  India accounts for a very large portion of all equity option contracts traded globally thus exhibiting a great boom.  Il. India’s stock market has grown rapidly in the recent past even overtaking Hong Kong’s at some point of time.  Ill. There is no regulatory body either to warn the small investors about the risks of options trading or to act on unregistered financial advisors in this regard.  Which of the statements given above are  correct?  (a) I and II only  (b) II and III only  (c) 1 and III only  (d) I, Il and III  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 
9. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : Circular economy reduces the emissions of greenhouse gases. Statement II : Circular economy reduces the use of raw materials as inputs. Statement III :  Circular economy reduces wastage in the production process.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (c) Only one of the Statements II and III is correct and that explains Statement I  (da) Neither Statement II nor Statement III is correct 
10. Consider the following statements :  I. Capital receipts create a liability or cause a reduction in the assets of the Government.  Il. Borrowings and disinvestment are capital receipts.  III. Interest received on loans creates a liability of the Government.  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) I and II only  (b) II and III only (c) I and III only (@) I, Il and Ill  [ P.T.O. 
11. Consider the following statements about  Raja Ram Mohan Roy :  I. He possessed great love and respect for the traditional philosophical systems of the East.  Il. He desired his countrymen to accept the rational and scientific approach and the principle of human dignity and social equality of all men and women.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 only  (b) II only  (c) Both I and II (a) Neither I nor II 
12. Consider the following subjects with  regard to Non-Cooperation Programme :  I. Boycott of law-courts and foreign cloth  Il. Observance of strict non-violence  Ill. Retention of titles and honours without using them in public  IV. Establishment of Panchayats for settling disputes  How many of the above were parts of Non-Cooperation Programme?  (a) Only one (b) Only two (c) Only three  (d) All the four  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 
13. The irrigation device called ‘Araghatta’  was  (a) a water bag made of leather pulled over a pulley  (b) a large wheel with earthen pots tied to the outer ends of its spokes  (c) a larger earthen pot driven by bullocks  (d) a large water bucket pulled up by rope directly by hand 
14. Who among the following rulers in  ancient India had assumed the titles Mattavilasa’, Vichitrachitta’ and ‘Gunabhara’?  (a) Mahendravarman I (b) Simhavishnu (c) Narasimhavarman I  (d) Simhavarman 
15. Fa-hien (Faxian), the Chinese pilgrim,  travelled to India during the reign of  (a) Samudragupta (b) Chandragupta II (c) Kumaragupta I  (da) Skandagupta  [P.T.0. 
16. Who among the following led a successful 18. The first Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, a  military campaign against the kingdom music training school, was set up in of Srivijaya, the powerful maritime 1901 by Vishnu Digambar Paluskar in State, which ruled the Malay Peninsula, ¢ ; Sumatra, Java and the neighbouring (a) Delhi islands? (b) Gwalior (a). Amoghavarsha (Rashtrakuta) (c) Ujjain fd) Lah (b) Prataparudra (Kakatiya) (a) 3 (c) Rajendra I (Chola) 19. Ashokan inscriptions suggest that the Pradeshika’, ‘Rajuka’ and ‘Yukta’ were (da) Vishnuvardhana (Hoysala) important officers at the  (a) village-level administration (b) district-level administration  (c) provincial administration
17. With reference to ancient India oak i (600-322 BC), consider the following (d) level of the central administration pairs :
20. Consider the following statements in respect of the Non-Cooperation  Territorial River flowing Movement : region in the region  I. The Congress’ declared the I. Asmaka 4 Godavari attainment of ‘Swaraj’ by all legitimate and peaceful means to  Il. Kamboja: Vipas be its objective. Ill. Avanti : Mahanadi II. It was to be implemented in stages ; with civil disobedience and non- IV. Kosala : Sarayu payment of taxes for the next stage  only if ‘Swaraj’ did not come within a year and the Government  ; : resorted to repression. How many of the pairs given above are  th tched? sae: ae Which of the statements given above  die ety is/are correct?  (a) 1 only (b) Only two (b) II only (ce), Only ‘three (c) Both I and Il (d) All the four (d) Neither I nor II  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 9 [P.P.0. 
21. Consider the following countries : I. Austria  Il. Bulgaria  Ill. Croatia  IV. Serbia  V. Sweden  VI. North Macedonia  How many of the above are members of  the North Atlantic Treaty Organization? (a) Only three (b)  (d) All the six  Only four (c) Only five 
22. Consider the following countries :  I. Bolivia Il. Brazil Ill. Colombia IV. Ecuador V. Paraguay VI. Venezuela  Andes mountains pass through how  many of the above countries? (a) Only two (b) Only three  (c) Only four (ad) Only five
23. Consider the following water bodies : I. Lake Tanganyika II. Lake Tonlé Sap Ill. Patos Lagoon  Through how many of them does the equator pass?  (a) Only one (b) Only two  (c) All the three (d) None 
24. Consider the following statements about turmeric during the year 2022-23 :  I. India is the largest producer and  exporter of turmeric in the world.  Il. More than 30 varieties of turmeric are grown in India.  Maharashtra, Telangana, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are major turmeric producing States in India.  TI.  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) Il and III only (c) 1 and III only (@) 1, Il and Ill 
25. Which of the following are the evidences  26.  11  of the phenomenon of continental drift?  I. The belt of ancient rocks from Brazil coast matches with those from Western Africa.  Il. The gold deposits of Ghana are  derived from the Brazil plateau  when the two continents lay side by  side.  The Gondwana system of sediments  from India is known to have its  counterparts in six different  landmasses of the Southern  Hemisphere.  Select the correct answer using the code  given below.  (a) 1 and III only  (b) 1 and II only  (c) I, Il and Ill  (d) Il and III only  Consider the following statements : Statement I : The amount of dust particles in the atmosphere is more in subtropical and temperate areas than in equatorial and polar regions. Statement II : Subtropical and temperate areas have less dry winds.  Ill.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement II explains Statement I  Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I Statement I is correct Statement II is not correct Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct  (b)  (c) but  (a)  [ P.T.O. 
27. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : In January, in the Northern Hemisphere, the isotherms bend equatorward while crossing the landmasses, and poleward while crossing the oceans.  Statement II : In January, the air over the oceans is warmer than that over the landmasses in the Northern Hemisphere.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement II explains Statement I  (b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I  (c) Statement I is correct but Statement II is not correct  (ad) Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct 
28. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : In the context of effect of water on rocks, chalk is known as a very permeable rock whereas clay is known as quite an impermeable or least permeable rock.  Statement II : Chalk is porous and hence can absorb water.  Statement III : Clay is not at all porous.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  13  (c) Only one of the Statements II and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  (d) Neither Statement II nor State- ment III is correct 
29. Consider the following statements :  I. Without the atmosphere, temperature would be well below freezing point everywhere on the Earth’s surface.  Il. Heat absorbed and trapped by the atmosphere maintains our planet’s average temperature.  Ill. Atmosphere’s gases, like carbon dioxide, are particularly good at absorbing and trapping radiation.  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) 1 and III only (b) 1 and II only (c) 1, Il and III (@) II and III only 
80. Consider the following statements about  the Rashtriya Gokul Mission :  I. It is important for the upliftment of rural poor as majority of low producing indigenous animals are with small and marginal farmers and landless labourers.  Il. It was initiated to promote indigenous cattle and _ buffalo rearing and conservation in a scientific and holistic manner.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 only  (b) Il only  (c) Both I and II (d) Neither I nor II  [P.7.0.  $31. Consider the following statements : Statement I : Studies indicate that carbon dioxide emissions from cement industry account for more than 5% of global carbon emissions. Statement II : Silica-bearing clay is mixed with limestone while manufacturing cement. Statement III : Limestone is converted into lime  during clinker production for cement manufacturing.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  Both Statement II and Statement III are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (b)  (c) Only one of the Statements II and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  (d) Neither Statement II nor Statement  Ill is correct 
32. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : At the 28th United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP28), India refrained from signing the ‘Declara- tion on Climate and Health’. Statement II : The COP28 Declaration on Climate and Health is a binding declaration; and if signed, it becomes manda- tory to decarbonize health sector.  Statement III :  If India’s health sector is  decarbonized, the resilience of its  health-care system may _ be  compromised. LVPK-O-PSO/56A  15  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement Til are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement Tl are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (c) Only one of the Statements II and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  Neither Statement II nor Statement Ill is correct  (a) 
33. Consider the following statements : Statement I : Scientific studies suggest that a  shift is taking place in the Earth’s rotation and axis.  Statement II :  Solar flares and associated coronal mass ejections bombarded the Earth’s outermost atmosphere with tremendous amount of energy.  Statement III : As the Earth’s polar ice melts, the  water tends to move towards the equator.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement Til are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (c) Only one of the Statements Il and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  Neither Statement II nor Statement Ill is correct  (a)  [ P.T.O. 
34. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : Article 6 of the Paris Agreement on climate change is frequently discussed in global discussions on sustainable development and climate change.  Statement II : Article 6 of the Paris Agreement on climate change sets out the principles of carbon markets.  Statement III : Article 6 of the Paris Agreement on climate change intends to promote inter-country non-market strategies to reach their climate targets.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (c) Only one of the Statements II and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  (d) Neither Statement II nor Statement III is correct 
35. Which one of the following launched the  Nature Solutions Finance Hub for Asia  and the Pacific’?  (a) The (ADB)  Asian Development Bank  (b) The Asian Infrastructure Invest- ment Bank (AIIB)  (c) The New Development Bank (NDB)  (d) The International Bank for Recon- struction and Development (IBRD)  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  17 
36. With reference to ‘Direct Air Capture’,  an emerging technology, which of the following statements is/are correct?  I. It can be used as a way of carbon sequestration.  Il. It can be a valuable approach for plastic production and in food processing.  Ill. In aviation, it can be a source of carbon for combining with hydrogen to create synthetic low-carbon fuel.  Select the correct answer using the code given below.  (a) 1 and II only (b) I only (c) 1, I and Il  (d) None of the above statements is correct 
37. Regarding Peacock tarantula (Gooty tarantula), consider the following statements :  I. It is an omnivorous crustacean.  Il. Its natural habitat in India is only limited to some forest areas.  Ill. In its natural habitat, it is an arboreal species.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) I only (b) 1 and Ill (c) I only (@) 1 and Il  [P.T.O. 
38. Consider the following statements :  I. Carbon dioxide (CO) emissions in India are less than 0°5 t CO)/ capita.  Il. In terms of CO, emissions from fuel combustion, India ranks second in Asia-Pacific region.  Ill. Electricity and heat producers are the largest sources of CO, emissions in India.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 and III only  (b) Tl only (c) Il and III only  (a) 1, I and I 
39. Consider the following pairs :  Plant Description  I. Cassava : Woody shrub  Il. Ginger : Herb with pseudostem  Ill. Malabar spinach : Herbaceous climber  IV. Mint : Annual shrub  V. Papaya : Woody shrub  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 19  How many of the above pairs are correctly matched?  (a) Only two (b) Only three (c) Only four  (d) All the five 
40. With reference to the planet Earth,  consider the following statements :  I. Rain forests produce more oxygen than that produced by oceans.  Il. Marine phytoplankton and photo- synthetic bacteria produce about  50% of world’s oxygen.  Ill. Well-oxygenated surface water contains several folds higher oxygen than that in atmospheric air.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) I and II (b) I only (c) 1 and Ill  (d) None of the above statements is correct  [ P.T.O. 
41. Consider the following types of vehicles : 44. Consider the following :  I. Full battery electric vehicles I. Cigarette butts  Il. Hydrogen fuel cell vehicles Il. Eyeglass lenses  Ill. Fuel cell-electric hybrid vehicles Ill. Car tyres  How many of the above are considered How many of them contain plastic?  as alternative powertrain vehicles? (a) Only one  a) Only one Only two  - oy daha (b) Only two  (c) All the three (d) None (c) All the three (a) None 
42. With reference to Unmanned Aerial  Vehicles (UAVs), consider the following 45. Consider the following substances :  statements : : I. Ethanol I. All types of UAVs can do vertical landing. Il. Nitroglycerine Il. All types of UAVs can do automated Tl. Urea  hovering. : 5 Coal gasification technology can be used  Ill. All types of UAVs can use battery in the production of how many of them? only as a source of power supply. (a) Only one How many of the statements given (b) Only two above are correct? All (a) Only one (b) Only two (<) sata (d) None (c) All the three (d) None
46. What is the common characteristic of the chemical substances generally known as CL-20, HMX and LLM-105, which are sometimes talked about in media? 
43. In the context of electric vehicle batteries, consider the following elements :  I. Cobalt  Il. Graphite (a) These are alternatives to hydro- Boe fluorocarbon refrigerants  Ill. Lithium  IV. Nickel (b) These are explosives in military  weapons How many of the above usually make up battery cathodes? (c) These are high-energy fuels for cruise missiles (a) Only one (b) Only two (d) These are fuels for rocket (c) Only three (d) All the four propulsion  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 21 pP.T.O. 
47. Consider the following statements :  I. It is expected that Majorana 1 chip will enable quantum computing.  Il. Majorana 1 introduced by Services (AWS).  Ill. Deep learning is a subset of machine learning.  chip has been Amazon Web  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) 1 and III only (c) I and III only (a) I, Il and Il 
48. With reference to monoclonal antibodies,  often mentioned in news, consider the following statements :  I. They are man-made proteins.  Il. They stimulate immunological function due to their ability to bind to specific antigens.  Ill. They are used in treating viral infections like that of Nipah virus.  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) 1 and III only (c) 1 and III only (da) 1, Il and Ill 
49. Consider the following statements :  I. No virus can survive in ocean waters.  Il. No virus can infect bacteria.  Ill. No virus can change the cellular transcriptional activity in host cells.  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  23  How many of the statements given above are correct?  (a) Only one (b) Only two (c) All the three  (d) None 
50. Consider the following statements :  Statement I :  Activated carbon is a good and an attractive tool to remove pollutants from effluent streams and to remediate contaminants from various industries.  Statement II :  Activated carbon exhibits a large surface area and a strong potential for adsorbing heavy metals.  Statement III :  Activated carbon can be easily synthesized from environmental wastes with high carbon content.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and both of them explain Statement I  (b) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct but only one of them explains Statement I  (c) Only one of the Statements II and Ill is correct and that explains Statement I  (d) Neither Statement II nor Statement Ill is correct  [ P.T.O. 
51. With reference to the Indian polity, How many of the above’ were  consider the following statements : established as per the provisions of,  3 the Constitution of India? I. An Ordinance can amend any  Central Act. (a) Only one (b) Only two  Il. An Ordinance can abridge a (c) All the three (d) None Fundamental Right.  Ill. An Ordinance can come into effect OAs COE Oe Pere Seen:  from a back date. I. The Constitution of India explicitly  mentions that in certain spheres  Which of the statements given above are the Governor of a State acts in correct? his/her own discretion.  (a) I and II only . Il. The President of India can, of  (b) II and III only his/her own, reserve a bill passed  by a State Legislature for his/her (c) 1 and Ill only consideration without it being (da) 1, Il and III forwarded by the Governor of the  Stat mn d.
52. Consider the following pairs : coco  State Description Which of oes statements given above I. Arunachal : The capital is named after in(ere Someeet Pradesh a fort, and the State has (a) 1 only two National oe (b) 1 only Il. Nagaland : The State came into exis- Roth Iand Il tence on the basis of a (jaeBo en Constitutional Amendment (ad) Neither I nor II Act P : Ill. Tripura : Initially a Part ‘C’ State, 55. Consider the following pairs : it became a centrally Provision in the Stated under administered territory with Constitution of India the reorganization of I. Separation of Judiciary : The Directive States in 1956 and later from the Executive in Principles attained the status of the public services of of the State a full-fledged State the State Policy j A Il. Valuing and preserving : The Funda- How many of the above pairs are of the rich heritage of mental Duties correctly matched? our composite culture (a) Only one (b) Only two Ill. Prohibition of employ- : The Funda- ment of children below mental Rights (c) All the three (da) None the age of 14 years in factories 
53. With reference to India, consider the . following : How many of the above pairs are  correctly matched? I. The Inter-State Council  Il. The National Security Council (a) Oriy cone (BgOnny, LO Ill. Zonal Councils (c) All the three (d) None  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 25 (PTO. 
56. Consider the following statements :  With reference to the Constitution of  India, if an area in a State is declared  as Scheduled Area under the Fifth  Schedule  I. the State Government loses its executive power in such areas and a local body assumes total administration  Il. the Union Government can take over the total administration of such areas under certain circum- stances on the recommendations of the Governor  Which of the statements given above is/are correct? (a) I only (b) Il only (c) Both I and Il (a) Neither I nor II
57. With reference to India, consider the following pairs :  Organization Union Ministry  I. The National Ministry of Automotive Board Commerce and Industry Il. The Coir Board Ministry of Heavy Industries  Ill. The National Centre for Trade Information  Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  How many of the correctly matched?  above pairs are  (a) Only one (c) All the three  (b) Only two  (a) 
58. Consider the following subjects under the Constitution of India :  I. List LUnion List, in the Seventh Schedule  Il. Extent of the executive power of a State  Ill. Conditions of the Governor’s office  None  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  27  For a constitutional amendment with respect to which of the above, ratification by the Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States is required before presenting the bill to the President of India for assent?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) Il and III only  (c) 1 and III only  (a) 1, Wand 
59. With reference to the Indian polity, consider the following statements :  I. The Governor of a State is not answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of his/her office.  Il. No criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against the Governor during his/her term of office.  Ill. Members of a State Legislature are not liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything said within the House.  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) I and II only  (b) Il and III only  (c) 1 and III only  (d) I, Il and Ill 
60. Consider the following activities : I. Production of crude oil  Il. Refining, storage and distribution of petroleum  Ill. Marketing and sale of petroleum products  IV. Production of natural gas  How many of the above activities are regulated by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board in our country?  (b) Only two (ad) All the four  (a) Only one (c) Only three  [ P.T.0. 
61. Suppose the revenue expenditure is  €80,000 crores and the revenue receipts of the Government are %60,000 crores. The Government budget also shows borrowings of = 10,000 crores and interest payments of ©€6,000 crores. Which of the following statements are correct?  I. Revenue deficit is € 20,000 crores. Il. Fiscal deficit is € 10,000 crores. Ill. Primary deficit is € 4,000 crores. Select the correct answer using the code given below.  (a) 1 and II only  (b) I and III only  (c) 1 and III only  (a) 1, I and I 
62. India is one of the founding members of  the International North-South Transport  Corridor (INSTC), a multimodal transportation corridor, which will connect  (a) India to Central Asia to Europe via Iran  (b) India to Central Asia via China  (c) India to South-East Asia through Bangladesh and Myanmar  (d) India to Europe through Azerbaijan 
63. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : Of the two major ethanol producers in the world, i.e., Brazil and the United States of America, the former produces more ethanol than the latter.  Statement II : Unlike in the United States of America where corn is the principal feedstock for ethanol production, sugarcane is the principal feedstock for ethanol production in Brazil.  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  29  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement Il explains Statement I  (b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I  (c) Statement I is correct but Statement II is not correct  (d) Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct 
64. The World Bank warned that India  could become one of the first places where wet-bulb temperatures routinely exceed 35°C. Which of the following statements best reflect(s) the implication of the above-said report?  I. Peninsular India will most likely suffer from flooding, tropical cyclones and droughts.  Il. The survival of animals including  humans will be affected as shedding of their body heat through perspiration becomes difficult.  Select the correct answer using the code given below.  (a) 1 only  (b) Il only  (c) Both I and Il (a) Neither I nor II 
65. A country’s fiscal deficit stands at  50,000 crores. It is receiving % 10,000 crores through non-debt creating capital receipts. The country’s interest liabilities are * 1,500 crores. What is the gross primary deficit?  (a) *©48,500 crores  (b) 51,500 crores  (c) %©58,500 crores  (d) None of the above  [P.T.0. 
66. Which of the following statements with  regard to recommendations of the 15th  Finance Commission of India are  correct?  I. It has recommended grants of 4,800 crores from the year 2022-23 to the year 2025-26 for incentivizing States to enhance educational outcomes.  Il. 45% of the net proceeds of Union taxes are to be shared with States.  Ill. ©45,000 crores are to be kept as performance-based incentive for all States for carrying out agricultural reforms.  IV. It reintroduced tax effort criteria to reward fiscal performance.  Select the correct answer using the code  given below.  (a) 1, Il and Il  (b) I, Il and IV  (c) I, Ill and IV  (a) Il, Ill and IV 
67. Consider the following statements in  respect of the International Bank for  Reconstruction and Development  (IBRD) :  I. It provides loans and guarantees to middle income countries.  II. It works single-handedly to help developing countries to reduce poverty.  Ill. It was established to help Europe rebuild after the World War II. Which of the statements given above are  correct?  (a) I and II only  (b) II and III only  (c) I and III only  (d) I, Il and Ill 
68. Consider the following statements in  respect of RTGS and NEFT :  I. In RTGS, the settlement time is instantaneous while in case of NEFT, it takes some time to settle payments.  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  31  Il. In RTGS, the customer is charged for inward transactions while that is not the case for NEFT.  Ill. Operating hours for RTGS are restricted on certain days while this is not true for NEFT.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 only (c) 1 and Ill  (b) 1 and II (d) Il only 
69. Consider the following countries :  I. United Arab Emirates  II, France  Ill. Germany  IV. Singapore  V. Bangladesh  How many countries amongst the above are there other than India where international merchant payments are accepted under UPI?  (a) Only two (b) Only three  (c) Only four (d) All the five 
70. Consider the following statements about  ‘PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana’ :  I. It targets installation of one crore solar rooftop panels in_ the residential sector.  Il. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy aims to impart training on installation, operation, mainte- nance and repairs of solar rooftop systems at grassroot levels.  Ill. It aims to create more than three lakhs skilled manpower through fresh skilling, and up- skilling, under scheme component of capacity building.  Which of the statements given above are  correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) 1 and III only  (c) II and III only  (a) 1, Il and Ill  [ P.T.O. 
71. “Sedition has become my religion” was  the famous statement given by Gandhiji at the time of  (a) the Champaran Satyagraha  (b) publicly violating Salt Law at Dandi  (c) attending the Second Round Table Conference in London  (d) the launch of the Quit India Movement 
72. The famous female figurine known as  Dancing Girl’, found at Mohenjo-daro, is made of  (a) carnelian (b) clay (c) bronze  (d) gold 
73. Who provided legal defence to the people  arrested in the aftermath of Chauri Chaura incident?  (a) C. R. Das  and  (b) Madan Mohan  Malaviya  Krishna Kant  (c) Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew and Khwaja  Hasan Nizami  (d@) M. A. Jinnah  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 
74. Subsequent to which one of the following  75.  76.  33  events, Gandhiji, who consistently opposed untouchability and appealed for its eradication from all spheres, decided to include the upliftment of ‘Harijans’ in his political and social programme?  (a) The Poona Pact  (b) The Gandhi-Irwin Agreement (Delhi Pact)  (c) Arrest of Congress leadership at the  time of the Quit India Movement  (4)  Promulgation of the Government of India Act, 1935  Consider the following fruits :  I. Papaya Il. Pineapple Ill. Guava  How many of the above were introduced in India by the Portuguese in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries?  (a) Only one (b) Only two  (c) All the three (da) None  Consider the following countries : I. United Kingdom Il. Denmark  Ill. New Zealand IV. Australia Vv. Brazil  How many of the above countries have more than four time zones? (a) All the five (b) Only four  (c) Only three (d) Only two  [ P.T.O. 
77. Consider the following statements : 79. Consider the following pairs :  I. Anadyr in Siberia and Nome in pare. eee Alaska are a few kilometers from L Botswana : Diamond each other, but when people are waking up and getting set for ll. Chile : Lithium breakfast in these cities, it would be different days. Ill. Indonesia : Nickel  Il. When it is Monday in Anadyr, it is Tuesday in Nome. In how many of the above rows is the given information correctly matched?  Which of the statements given above tak Oey one  is/are correct?  (b) Only two (a) I only (c) All the three (d) None (b) II only  (c) Both I and II 
80. Consider the following pairs : (a) Neither I nor II  Region Country bts Mallorca b Italy Il. Normandy: Spain
78. Who among the following was the Ill. Sardinia France founder of the ‘Self-Respect Movement’? (a) ‘Periyar’ E. V. Ramaswamy Naicker In how many of the above rows is the  given information correctly matched? (b) Dr. B. R. Ambedkar (a) Only one (b) Only two (c) Bhaskarrao Jadhav (c) All the three  (ad) Dinkarrao Javalkar (d) None  LVPK-O-PSO/56A 35 EPEC: 
81. Consider the following statements :  Statement I : Some rare earth elements are used in the manufacture of flat television screens and computer monitors. Statement II : Some rare earth elements have phosphorescent properties.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement II explains Statement I  Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I  (c) Statement I is correct Statement II is not correct  Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct  (b)  but  (a) 
82. Consider the following statements :  I. Indian Railways have prepared a National Rail Plan (NRP) to create ¢ a ready’ railway system by  028.  Il. ‘Kavach’ is an Automatic Train Protection system developed in collaboration with Germany.  Ill. ‘Kavach’ system consists of RFID tags fitted on track in station section.  Which of the statements given above are not correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) Tl and III only (c) 1 and III only (a) 1, Il and Ill 
83. Consider the following space missions :  I. Axiom-4 Il. SpaDeX Ill. Gaganyaan  How many of the space missions given above encourage and support micro- gravity research?  (a) Only one (c) All the three  (b) Only two (d) None  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  37 
84. With  Ill.  reference to India’s defence,  consider the following pairs :  Aircraft type Description  Dornier-228 Maritime patrol aircraft  IL-76 Supersonic combat aircraft  C-17 Globe- Military transport  master III aircraft  How many of the pairs given above are correctly matched?  (a) Only one  (b) Only two  (c) All the three (d) None 
85. Artificial way of causing rainfall to reduce  air pollution makes use of  (a) silver iodide and potassium iodide (b) silver nitrate and potassium iodide (c) silver iodide and potassium nitrate  (da) silver chloride  nitrate and potassium 
86. Consider the following statements with  regard to pardoning power of the President of India :  I. The exercise of this power by the President can be subjected to limited judicial review.  Il. The President can exercise this power without the advice of the Central Government.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 only  (b) Il only  (c) Both I and II (ad) Neither I nor II  [ P.T.O. 
87. Consider the following statements :  I. On the dissolution of the House of the People, the Speaker shall not vacate his/her __ office until immediately before the first meeting of the House of the People after the dissolution.  II. According to the provisions of the Constitution of India, a Member of the House of the People on being elected as Speaker shall resign from his/her political party immediately.  Ill. The Speaker of the House of the People may be removed from his/her office by a resolution of the House of the People passed by a majority of all the then Members of the House, provided that no resolution shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.  Which of the statements given above are correct?  (a) 1 and II only  (b) Il and III only  (c) 1 and III only  (a) 1, II and Ill 
88. Consider the following statements :  I. If any question arises as to whether a Member of the House of the People has become subject to disqualification under the 10th Schedule, the President’s decision in accordance with the opinion of the Council of Union Ministers shall be final.  Il. There is no mention of the word ‘political party’ in the Constitution of India.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) I only  (b) II only  (c) Both I and II  (d) Neither I nor II  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  39 
89. Consider the following statements :  Statement I :  In India, State Governments have no power for making rules for grant of concessions in respect of extraction of minor minerals even though such minerals are located in their territories.  Statement II :  In India, the Central Government has the power to notify minor minerals under the relevant law.  Which one of the following is correct in respect of the above statements?  (a) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and Statement II explains Statement I  (b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct but Statement II does not explain Statement I  (c) Statement I is correct but Statement II is not correct  (d) Statement I is not correct but Statement II is correct 
90. Which organization has enacted the  Nature Restoration Law (NRL) to tackle climate change and biodiversity loss?  (a) The European Union (b) The World Bank  (c) The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  (da) The Food and Organization  Agriculture  [P.T.O.  
91. Consider the following statements :  I. Panchayats at the intermediate level exist in all States.  Il. To be eligible to be a Member of a Panchayat at the intermediate level, a person should attain the age of thirty years.  Ill. The Chief Minister of a State constitutes a commission to review the financial position of Panchayats at the intermediate levels and to make recommendations regarding the distribution of net proceeds of taxes and duties, leviable by the State, between the State and Panchayats at the intermediate level.  Which of the statements given above are not correct?  (a) land Il only (b) I and III only (c) 1 and Ill only (d) I, Il and Ill 
92. Consider the following statements in  respect of BIMSTEC :  I. It is a regional organization consisting of seven member States till January 2025.  Il. It came into existence with the signing of the Dhaka Declaration, 1999.  Ill. Bangladesh, India, Sri_ Lanka, Thailand and Nepal are founding member States of BIMSTEC.  IV. In BIMSTEC, the subsector of tourism’ is being led by India.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 and Il (c) land IV  (b) Tl and III (d) 1 only 
93. Who amongst the following are members  of the Jury to select the recipient of  ‘Gandhi Peace Prize’?  I. The President of India  Il. The Prime Minister of India  Ill. The Chief Justice of India  IV. The Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha  Select the correct answer using the code  given below.  (a) Il and IV only (b) I, I and Ill  (c) 1, Wand IV (d) 1 and Ill only  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  41 
94. GPS-Aided Geo Augmented Navigation 
95. Consider  (GAGAN) uses a system of ground stations to provide necessary augmentation. Which of the following statements is/are correct in respect of GAGAN?  I. It is designed to provide additional accuracy and integrity.  Il. It will allow more uniform and high quality air traffic management.  Ill. It will provide benefits only in aviation but not in other modes of transportation.  Select the correct answer using the code  given below.  (a) I, Il and Ill  (c) I only  (b) II and III only (a) 1 and II only  the following statements  regarding AI Action Summit held in  Grand Palais, Paris in February 2025 :  I. Co-chaired with India, the event builds on the advances made at the Bletchley Park Summit held in 2023 and the Seoul Summit held in 2024.  Il. Along with other countries, US and UK also signed the declaration on inclusive and sustainable Al.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct? (b) Il only  (a) 1 only (c) Both I and II (d) Neither I nor Il 
96. Consider the following pairs :  I.  Il.  Ill.  International Year of the 2026 Woman Farmer  International Year of 2027 Sustainable and Resilient  Tourism  International Year of Peace 2025 and Trust  International Year of Asteroid 2029  Awareness and Planetary  Defence  How many of the ake given above are correctly matched’  (a) Only one (c) Only three  (b) Only two (ad) All the four  [P.T.O. 
97. Consider the following statements with regard to BRICS :  I. 16th BRICS Summit was held under the Chairship of Russia in Kazan.  Il. Indonesia has become a_ full member of BRICS.  Ill. The theme of the 16th BRICS Summit was Strengthening Multiculturalism for Just Global Development and Security.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) I and II (b) 1 and Ill (c) I and III (d) I only 
98. Consider the following statements about Lokpal :  I. The power of Lokpal applies to public servants of India, but not to the Indian public servants posted outside India.  Il. The Chairperson or a Member shall not be a Member of the Parliament or a Member of the Legislature of any State or Union Territory, and only the Chief Justice of India, whether incumbent or retired, has to be its Chairperson.  Ill. The Chairperson or a Member shall not be a person of less than forty-five years of age on the date of assuming office as the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be.  IV. Lokpal cannot inquire into the allegations of corruption against a sitting Prime Minister of India.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) III only  (b) Il and Ill  (c) I and IV (da) None of the above statements is correct  LVPK-O-PSO/56A  99.  Consider the following statements in respect of the first Kho Kho World Cup:  I. The event was held in Delhi, India.  Il. Indian men beat Nepal with a score of 78-40 in the final to become the World Champion in men category.  III. Indian women beat Nepal with a score of 54-36 in the final to become the World Champion in women category.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) 1 only  (b) Il and III only (c) 1 and III only (a) I, Il and Ill 
100. Consider the following statements :  I. In the finals of the 45th Chess Olympiad held in 2024, Gukesh Dommaraju became the world’s youngest winner after defeating the Russian player Ian Nepomniachtchi.  Il. Abhimanyu Mishra, an American chess player, holds the record of becoming world’s youngest ever Grandmaster.  Which of the statements given above is/are correct?  (a) I only  (b) II only  (c) Both I and II  (ad) Neither I nor II  [ P.T.O. 
